Update tutorial (#2068)
reimagined/resolve: docs/tutorial.md

---
id: tutorial
title: Step-by-Step Tutorial

> description: Throughout this tutorial, you will iteratively develop a ShoppingList application and learn fundamental concepts of the reSolve framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Throughout this tutorial, you will develop a ShoppingList application and learn fundamental concepts of the reSolve framework.
```

> description: This document provides a step-by-step tutorial for the reSolve framework. Throughout this tutorial, you will iteratively develop a ShoppingList application and learn fundamental concepts of the reSolve framework.

Reviewer: `This document provides a step-by-step tutorial for the reSolve framework.`
Please rewrite without using "provides".

Author: I removed the first sentence completely. This description is for search engines.

---

```mdx-code-block
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
```

> This document provides a step-by-step tutorial for the reSolve framework.

Reviewer: Please rewrite without using "provides".

Author: Changed to "This document is a step-bystep tutorial"

Reviewer: Thank you.

> Throughout this tutorial, you will iteratively develop a ShoppingList application and learn fundamental concepts of the reSolve framework.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "iteratively" in this context? Are you repeating procedures or steps over and over?

Author: It seems, I have chosen a completely wrong word. What I was trying to say is "gradually and in small adjustments". But we already stated that the tutorial is "step-by-step", which means the same, so I think I should just remove the word.

Reviewer: Thank you. I've added the suggestion below:

```suggestion
Throughout this tutorial, you will develop a ShoppingList application and learn fundamental concepts of the reSolve framework.
```

:::tip ES, CQRS
The reSolve framework implements the Event Sourcing (ES) and Command and Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS) paradigms.

> - With **ES**, your application stores not a mutable state, but a chain of events that lead to this state. With this approach, no information is ever lost by the application and the state can always be rebuilt from the beginning of the history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- With **ES**, your application stores not a mutable state, but a chain of events that lead to this state. With this technique, no information is ever lost by the application and the state can always be rebuilt from the beginning of the history.
```

- The **CQRS** paradigm requires an application to implement the write side that can only handle commands, and the read side that answers data requests.

> We recommend that your familiarize yourself with basics of event sourcing and CQRS before you start this tutorial. You can find a curated list of learning resources in the [FAQ](faq.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend that you review the basics of event sourcing and CQRS before you start this tutorial. You can find a curated list of learning resources in the [FAQ](faq.md).
```

Use the **create-resolve-app** tool to create a new reSolve application:

```sh
yarn create resolve-app shopping-list
```

After this, a minimal reSolve application is ready. To run it in development mode, type:

```sh
cd shopping-list
yarn dev
```

### Running Tests

> A new reSolve application contains a minimalistic [TestCafe](https://testcafe.io/) test located in `test/e2e/index.test.js` that runs on the client and checks that the reSolve server responds normally. You are also free to modify this file to check your application's functionality.

Reviewer: Is the term "minimalistic" a widely-used term in the context of describing an application/test?
For example, can we say "basic" instead?

Reviewer: Thank you.

Call the project's `test:e2e` script to run the test:

```sh
yarn test:e2e
```

> Each consequent lesson in this tutorial will offer you new tests as you develop your application. Copy these tests to your application and run them to ensure that you are ready to move to the next lesson.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each subsequent lesson in this tutorial will offer you new tests as you develop your application. Copy these tests to your application and run them to ensure that you are ready to move to the next lesson.
```

### Remove Demo Code

A new application contains demo code that demonstrates reSolve's core features. Follow the steps below to remove this code so you can start your application from scratch:

> - Delete all the contents from the project's **client** and **common** folders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Delete all content from the project's **client** and **common** folders.
```

- Open the **config.app.js** file and remove all options specified within the `appConfig` configuration object:
  ```js
  // config.app.js
  const appConfig = {
    // This object should be empty.
  }
  export default appConfig
  ```
- Open the **config.dev.js** and **config.test-functional.js** files and, in both files, remove or comment out the `readModelConnectors` option:

  ```js
  // config.dev.js, config.test-functional.js
  const devConfig = {
  ...
    // Remove or comment out the option below.

    // readModelConnectors: {
    //   default: {
    //     module: '@resolve-js/readmodel-lite',
    //     options: {
    //       databaseFile: 'data/read-models.db',
    //     },
    //   },
    // }
    ...
  }
  export default devConfig
  ```

- Open the **test/e2e/index.test.js** file and remove or comment out the following test case:

  ```js
  // Remove or comment out the test case below.

  // test('home page', async (t) => {
  // await t
  //    .expect(await Selector('span').withText('reSolve React Template').exists)
  //    .eql(true)
  // })
  ```

> ## **Lesson 1** - Write side - Add Shopping Lists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## **Lesson 1** - Write Side - Add Shopping Lists
```

**config.app.js**

```js
const appConfig = {
  aggregates: [
    {
      // The aggregate name
      name: 'ShoppingList',

>       // A path to the file that defines the aggregate's command handlers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // A path to the file that defines the aggregate's command handlers.
```

> In addition to the aggregate name, command type and payload, this object specifies the aggregate's ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the aggregate name, command type, and payload, this object specifies the aggregate's ID.
```

To send a command to the aggregate, run the application and send a POST request to the following URL:

```
http://127.0.0.1:3000/api/commands
```

<details>
<summary>

**Test Your Application**

> Expand this section for an example, on how to test this functionality in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expand this section for an example on how to test this functionality in your application.
```

</summary>

> You can write an end-to-end test to check the new functionality. Refer to the [Running Tests](#running-tests) section for the information on how to run tests in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can write an end-to-end test to check the new functionality. Refer to the [Running Tests](#running-tests) section for information on how to run tests in your application.
```

> You can manually modify your application's test as shown below or use the test included into the lesson's [example project](https://github.com/reimagined/resolve/tree/dev/tutorial/lesson-1):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manually modify your application's test as shown below or use the test included in the lesson's [example project](https://github.com/reimagined/resolve/tree/dev/tutorial/lesson-1):
```

}
```

<details>
<summary>

**Test Your Application**

> Expand this section for an example, on how to test the validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expand this section for an example on how to test the validation.
```

```js
test('validation should work correctly', async () => {
  const matches = [
    {
      command: {
        aggregateName: 'ShoppingList',
        aggregateId: 'shopping-list-2',
        type: 'createShoppingList',
        payload: {},
      },
      error: 'The "name" field is required',
    },
    {
      command: {
        aggregateName: 'ShoppingList',
        aggregateId: 'shopping-list-1',
        type: 'createShoppingList',
        payload: {
          name: 'List 1',
        },
      },
      error: 'Shopping list already exists',
    },
    {
      command: {
        aggregateName: 'ShoppingList',
        aggregateId: 'shopping-list-4000',
        type: 'createShoppingItem',
        payload: {
          id: '5',
          text: 'Bread',
        },
      },
      error: 'Shopping list does not exist',
    },
  ]

  for (const match of matches) {
    const response = await fetch(`${MAIN_PAGE}/api/commands`, {
      headers: {
        'Content-Type': 'application/json',
      },
      method: 'POST',
      body: JSON.stringify(match.command),
    })

    const error = await response.text()

    await t.expect(error).contains(match.error)
  }
})
```

</details>

---

> ## **Lesson 2** - Read side - Create a Read Model to Query Shopping Lists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## **Lesson 2** - Read Side - Create a Read Model to Query Shopping Lists
```

### Add a Read Model

Add a **ShoppingLists** Read Model to your application.

:::tip Read Model

> A Read Model is entity at the application's read side that answers data requests. A Read Model receives events and populates a persistent store based on event data. It then uses the collected data to build the requested data samples.

Reviewer: `A Read Model is entity at the application's read side that answers data requests.`

What do you mean by "entity"?

Author: I mean an abstract "program entity". I rewrote the sentence to be more specific:
"A Read Model is a data model at the application's read side that answers data requests."

Reviewer: Sounds good. Thank you.

- [store.defineTable](api/read-model/store.md#definetable)
- [store.insert](api/read-model/store.md#insert)

> The type of the physical store used to save data is defined by a Read Model connector. Add the following code to the **config.dev.js** file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type of the physical store used to save data is defined by a Read Model connector. Add the following code to the **config.dev.js** file:
```

**config.dev.js**

> 

Reviewer: Can you make the following change to line 394 below?

Line 394:
`// The 'config.dev.js' file defines setting used only in the development environment.`

Can  you change "setting" to "settings"?

Author: Done

Reviewer: Thanks.

}
```

> Specify the same option within the **config.test-functional.js** file so that e2e tests could work with read models:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specify the same option within the **config.test-functional.js** file so that e2e tests work with read models:
```

**config.app.js**

```js
const appConfig = {
  ...
  readModels: [
    {
      name: 'ShoppingLists',
      projection: 'common/read-models/shopping_lists.projection.js',
      resolvers: 'common/read-models/shopping_lists.resolvers.js',
      connectorName: 'default'
    }
  ]
}
export default appConfig
```

<details>
<summary>

**Test Your Application**

> Expand this section for an example, on how to test the ShoppingLists Read Model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expand this section for an example on how to test the ShoppingLists Read Model.
```

</summary>
<div>

You can define a reusable component that generates the document `<head>` section based on the specified parameters. In this component, you can generate static resource links as well as document metadata. The code sample below demonstrates how this component is defined in the example application:

[client/components/Header.js](https://github.com/reimagined/resolve/blob/dev/tutorial/lesson-3/client/components/Header.js)

```jsx
import React from 'react'
// The react-helmet library allows you to manage the document *head* section.
import { Helmet } from 'react-helmet'
import { useStaticResolver } from '@resolve-js/react-hooks'

const Header = ({ title, css }) => {
  // Use the *useStaticResolver* hook to obtain the full path to a static resource
  // from a relative path.
  const resolveStatic = useStaticResolver()
  // Generate a list of links for stylesheets.
  const stylesheetLinks = css.map((href) => ({
    rel: 'stylesheet',
    href: resolveStatic(href),
  }))

>   // You can use the same approach to generate links for other resource types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // You can use the same technique to generate links for other resource types.
```

  // const faviconLink = {
  //   rel: 'icon',
  //   type: 'image/png',
  //   href: resolveStatic(favicon),
  // }
  // Merge all links together in one list.
  const links = [...stylesheetLinks] // [...stylesheetLinks, faviconLink]
  const meta = {
    name: 'viewport',
    content: 'width=device-width, initial-scale=1',
  }
  // Use react-helmet to render the *head* section with your settings.
  return (
    <div>
      <Helmet title={title} link={links} meta={[meta]} />
    </div>
  )
}

export default Header
```

> Now you can configure the `<head>` section within the root component:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now configure the `<head>` section within the root component:
```

**client/components/MyLists.js**

```jsx
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react'

> 

Reviewer: Please make the following changes to the lines below:

Line 551:
`// The 'useQuery' hook is used to querry the 'ShoppingLists' Read Model's 'all' resolver.`
"querry" is mispelled. Please fix.

Line 943:
`Currently your reSolve application can create shopping lists and their items. The application also requires the capability to toggle shopping list items as well as remove and items and entire lists.`
Please add a comma after "Currently".
What do you mean by "as well as remove and items and entire lists"?

Line 1089:
`The useCommandHook allows you send commands to reSolve.`
Please update this line as follows:
`The useCommandHook allows you to send commands to reSolve.`

Line 1101:
`// A callback user to pass info about a newly created shopping list to the parrent component.`
"parrent" is mispelled. Please fix.

Author: Applied your edits.
>What do you mean by "as well as remove and items and entire lists"?
Changed to "as well as remove items and entire lists"

Reviewer: Thank you.

![result](assets/tutorial/lesson3-result.png)

<details>
<summary>

**Test Your Application**

> Expand this section for an example, on how to test the client application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expand this section for an example on how to test the client application.
```

</summary>

Add the following test case to the application's test file.

[test/e2e/index.test.js:](https://github.com/reimagined/resolve/blob/dev/tutorial/lesson-3/test/e2e/index.test.js)

```js
fixture`reSolve Application`.beforeEach(async (t) => {
  await t.setNativeDialogHandler(() => true)

>   // Add the following line to the fixture so the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Add the following line to the fixture so that the test
```

>   // navigates to the main page before each test case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // navigates to the main page before each test case:
```

This lesson describes how you can use a View Model to obtain shopping list items and display them as a list within the client browser.

:::tip View Model

> A View Model is a reactive Read Model that is built on the fly for one or several aggregate IDs. A client can maintain a WebSocket connection with a resolve server to receive View Model data updates in real time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A View Model is a reactive Read Model that is built on the fly for one or more aggregate IDs. A client can maintain a WebSocket connection with a resolve server to receive View Model data updates in real time.
```

> The downside is that View Models do not have persistent state and should be rebuilt on every query, so they are better suited for small data samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The downside is that View Models do not have a persistent state and should be rebuilt on every query, so they are better suited for small data samples.
```

![List Items](assets/tutorial/lesson4-navigation.png)

Add a route for the ShoppingList component to the router config:

**client/routes.js:**

```js
import ShoppingList from './components/ShoppingList'
...
export default [
  {
    ...
    routes: [
      ...
      {
        path: '/:id',
        component: ShoppingList,
      },
    ],
  },
]
```

> Run the application and click a shopping list's name view the result. To test the View Model's reactiveness, keep the page opened and use the following console input to add a shopping list item:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the application and click a shopping list's name to view the result. To test the View Model's reactiveness, keep the page opened and use the following console input to add a shopping list item:
```

The page is automatically updated to display the new item.

<details>
<summary>

**Test Your Application**

> Expand this section for an example, on how to test the new functionality in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expand this section for an example on how to test the new functionality in your application.
```

Add the following test case to the application's test file.

[test/e2e/index.test.js:](https://github.com/reimagined/resolve/blob/dev/tutorial/lesson-4/test/e2e/index.test.js)

```js
const waitSelector = async (t, eventSubscriber, selector) => {
  while (true) {
    const res = await fetch(`${MAIN_PAGE}/api/event-broker/read-models-list`)

    const readModel = (await res.json()).find(
      (readModel) => readModel.eventSubscriber === eventSubscriber
    )

    if (readModel.status !== 'deliver') {
      throw new Error(`Test failed. Read-model status "${readModel.status}"`)
    }

    try {
      await t.expect((await selector).exists).eql(true)
      break
    } catch (e) {}
  }
}

...

test('shopping list items are displayed on page', async (t) => {
  await t.click(Selector('a').withText('List 1'))
  await waitSelector(t, 'ShoppingLists', Selector('div.list-group-item'))
  await t.expect(Selector('label').withText('Milk').exists).eql(true)
  await t.expect(Selector('label').withText('Eggs').exists).eql(true)
  await t.expect(Selector('label').withText('Canned beans').exists).eql(true)
  await t.expect(Selector('label').withText('Paper towels').exists).eql(true)
})
```

> This test case requires API exposed by [@resolve-js/module-admin](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@resolve-js/module-admin) to obtain the list of read models from the server. Follow the steps below to add this module to your application in the testing mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test case requires API exposed by [@resolve-js/module-admin](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@resolve-js/module-admin) to obtain the list of read models from the server. Follow the steps below to add this module to your application in testing mode.
```

- [useCommand](api/client/resolve-react-hooks.md#usecommand)

![Check List Item](assets/tutorial/lesson5-check-item.png)

<details>
<summary>

**Test Your Application**

> Expand this section for an example, on how to test data editing in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expand this section for an example on how to test data editing in your application.
```
